updated documentation for platform connections under developers guide (#3074)
BSC-ES/autosubmit: docs/source/devguide/platforms/index.rst

.. note::

>     This documentation is based on the v4.1.17 branch, and can only guarantee reproducibility in this context

Reviewer: "v4.1.17 branch" this doesn't look very future-proof (not your fault). Maybe we could either fetch it from the current version in the VERSION file or somewhere else, or just say that this is the latest... or--the option I'm more inclined to I think-- remove this note. ReadTheDocs should be showing the "Latest" somewhere in the bottom of the page, with the option for the user to switch versions. If we are to tell the user this docs about the platforms is the latest.... then why don 't we alert that in the config... in the networking part... in the templates part???

Author: I think its better to remove this section as well and i agree its not future proof as the previous contributor had it at version 4.1.13.

Extending an Existing Platform
--------------------------------

Platforms are defined under Python classes. The source files for such classes are stored inside
``autosubmit/platforms/`` directory. To extend an existing platform we will create a child class from an existing
platform class, for which first we need to identify which existing platform is the most suitable for our project.

.. note::
    Currently the platforms available are:

    - :mod:`Local Platform <autosubmit.platforms.locplatform>` — runs jobs
      directly on the machine where Autosubmit is running. No SSH, no
      scheduler. Used for local preparation steps in a workflow.
    - :mod:`PS Platform <autosubmit.platforms.psplatform>` — a remote host with
      no batch scheduler. Connects via SSH and tracks jobs as remote OS

>       processes (``ps``).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - :mod:`PS Platform <autosubmit.platforms.psplatform>` — a remote host with
      no scheduler, as it uses ``PowerShell``. Connects via SSH and tracks jobs as remote OS
      processes (``ps``).
```

    - :mod:`EC Platform <autosubmit.platforms.ecplatform>` — ECMWF systems
      reached through the ``ecaccess`` toolchain. The underlying scheduler can

>       be ``pbs``, ``loadleveler`` or ``slurm``, selected via the platform's

Reviewer: I think loadleveler is no more. Can't tell if that will work? Maybe it worked in the past, before we removed... can you confirm this?

Author: <img width="1233" height="431" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1a48188a-4288-4c6a-8268-090c4b1e75ad" />
under ecplatform we still have loadleveler as a valid scheduler but i think the code needs to be updated as this section was written 10 years ago and loadleveler was discontinued in 2020, was it kept for backwards compatibility ?

      ``VERSION`` field.
    - :mod:`PJM Platform <autosubmit.platforms.pjmplatform>` — Fujitsu's PJM

>       scheduler, used on Fugaku and similar systems. Connects via SSH.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - :mod:`PJM Platform <autosubmit.platforms.pjmplatform>` — Fujitsu's PJM
      scheduler, used on Fugaku and others large-scale supercomputers. Connects via SSH.
```

    - :mod:`PBS Platform <autosubmit.platforms.pbsplatform>` — PBS Pro /

>       OpenPBS scheduler. Connects via SSH.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - :mod:`PBS Platform <autosubmit.platforms.pbsplatform>` — Portable Batch System (PBS) / PBS Pro /
      OpenPBS scheduler used on Miyabi. Connects via SSH.
```

    - :mod:`Slurm Platform <autosubmit.platforms.slurmplatform>` — the Slurm
      workload manager (MareNostrum, Leonardo, LUMI, etc.). Connects via SSH.

>       Used as the worked example in this guide.

Reviewer: worked example here sounds odd to me?

Composing the Extended Platform Class

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: I normally keep the length of the header marker the same as the text in rst. Was there a reason for changing this? https://matthewsetter.com/blog/item/restructuredtext-headers

> Thirdly, you have to remember to underline all of the text in the header. You can’t underline part of it, though you can underline more if you wish.

Normally, though, you see people matching the length in most Python projects, including the Python project itself -- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/python/cpython/refs/heads/main/Doc/extending/index.rst

If we are to change it for a reason, then we might better use the same everywhere, i.e., if there's a reason for using more then the title length, then let's do it everywhere for consistency.

Author: there is no elaborate reason, will change it match everywhere and be concise.

.. note::
    Currently the platforms available are:

    - :mod:`Local Platform <autosubmit.platforms.locplatform>` — runs jobs
      directly on the machine where Autosubmit is running. No SSH, no
      scheduler. Used for local preparation steps in a workflow.
    - :mod:`PS Platform <autosubmit.platforms.psplatform>` — a remote host with
      no batch scheduler. Connects via SSH and tracks jobs as remote OS
      processes (using the Unix ``ps`` command).
    - :mod:`EC Platform <autosubmit.platforms.ecplatform>` — ECMWF systems
      reached through the ``ecaccess`` toolchain. The underlying scheduler is
      selected via the platform's ``VERSION`` field (``slurm`` on ECMWF's
      current Atos systems; ``pbs`` is also supported for older
      configurations).

>     - :mod:`PJM Platform <autosubmit.platforms.pjmplatform>` — Fujitsu's PJM
>       scheduler, used on Fugaku and other large-scale supercomputers.
>       Connects via SSH.

Reviewer 2: This is something we came across the other day and it makes sense to add it on this PR.

```suggestion
    - :mod:`PJM Platform <autosubmit.platforms.pjmplatform>` — Fujitsu's PJM
      scheduler, used on Fugaku and other large-scale supercomputers. (also known as TCM Technical Computing Suite)
      Connects via SSH.
```

    if job_data_dc and type(self.platform) is not str and (self.platform.type in ["slurm", "example"]):
        thread_write_finish = Thread(target=ExperimentHistory(self.expid, jobdata_dir_path=BasicConfig.JOBDATA_DIR, historiclog_dir_path=BasicConfig.HISTORICAL_LOG_DIR).write_platform_data_after_finish, args=(job_data_dc, self.platform))
        thread_write_finish.name = "JOB_data_{}".format(self.name)

>         thread_write_finish.start()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        thread_write_finish.name = f"JOB_data_{self.name}"
        thread_write_finish.start()
```

and deleted under the configured ``SCRATCH_DIR``. It is done by creating a small probe directory under
``<scratch_dir>/<project>/<user>/`` and immediately removing it. The probe is
a directory, not a file; the name it uses depends on the platform type:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 22 35 43

   * - Platform type
     - Probe directory name
     - How it is created
   * - ``slurm`` / ``pjm`` / ``pbs``
     - ``permission_checker_azxbyc``
     - Over the existing SSH/SFTP session.
   * - ``ps``
     - ``ps_permission_checker_azxbyc``
     - Shell commands over the existing SSH session.
   * - ``ecaccess``
     - ``_permission_checker_azxbyc``
     - Local ``ecaccess-file-*`` commands against the ECMWF gateway. Several parent directories are created first because ``ecaccess-file-mkdir`` has no recursive option.
   * - ``local``
     - (none)
     - The local platform does not perform a write-permission check.

.. note::
    Operators searching log files or the remote scratch filesystem need to
    look for all three directory names, because each platform type uses a
    different one. A search restricted to ``permission_checker_azxbyc`` will

>     miss probes from ``ps`` and ``ecaccess`` platforms.

Reviewer: Are we keeping the `permission_checker_azxbyc` file, @rajeshsuraj ? I thought AS created it, confirmed whether it had any issues or not, and then deleted it?

Author: yes, that's how it works , i will reword this section to be more clear.

When the write-permission check runs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The check is triggered by a small number of user-facing commands, and the
frequency depends on the command:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 28 72

   * - Command
     - When the probe runs
   * - ``autosubmit run``

>      - Once per configured platform at the start of the run, before the main loop begins. If the run later encounters a connection error and it is recovered, the probe runs again for each new attempt on each of the platforms. The number of retries is bounded by ``CONFIG.RECOVERY_RETRIALS`` (default ``3650``), so a prolonged outage can produce many probe entries in the logs.

Reviewer: This is reading as if we retry 3650 times, but I think in reality we retry up to 3650 seconds by default? Or I think it was supposed to be that way...

Author: yeah the count is 3650, it's not a time budget as the default ``3650`` is the count from a per-attempt sleep that grows from 15s to a cap of 120s, so the default corresponds to roughly 72–122 hours of outage tolerance)
<img width="1266" height="560" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7cd24331-ba94-4755-9b82-09ccffa96aa6" />

   * - ``autosubmit setstatus``
     - Once per platform that currently has jobs in ``QUEUING``, ``SUBMITTED`` or ``RUNNING`` state. When ``setstatus`` is run before ``autosubmit create`` (the typical operational case, where all jobs are still ``WAITING`` or ``READY``) no probe is created.
   * - ``autosubmit stop --cancel``
     - Once per configured platform. This applies to any scheduler, not only Slurm; the trigger is the ``--cancel`` flag, not the platform type.

The probe does **not** run during the main loop of ``autosubmit run`` after
startup, during ``autosubmit recovery``, during ``autosubmit create``, or

> when Autosubmit reconnects after a transient network error mid-run.

Reviewer: Is this confirmed? Did you write this reading the AS code in autosubmit.py and in the platforms package?

I think during the main loop of `autosubmit run`, after startup, if there's an error it will call `prepare_run` again, which should call `restore_platforms`, I think. And that function would check the permissions again. Can you confirm?

Author: Yes, I did read the code — this was actually one of the specific things I dug into for this doc, because issue reporter raised the same suspicion in the original issue.
prepare_run only calls restore_platforms inside its if not recover: branch — I re-checked this today against autosubmit.py. On the recovery path, prepare_run(recover=True) returns without touching restore_platforms. The restore_platforms invocation that fires on retry is done by a separate reconnection loop inside run_experiment (the while not reconnected: loop that comes after the while not recovery: loop), not by prepare_run. So the probe fires at most once per platform per recovery episode.

.. _stale_job_data_recovery:

Stale job-data recovery
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Autosubmit keeps a history database with one row per job execution. If a job
ran but the row for that execution is incomplete (for example because
Autosubmit was interrupted before the start and end timestamps were
recorded), Autosubmit will try to fetch the missing values from the remote
``STAT`` file for that job. This recovery runs during ``autosubmit run``,
``autosubmit create``, ``autosubmit setstatus`` and ``autosubmit recovery``.

> The path opens SSH sessions to the affected platforms when needed, but it

Reviewer: The path opens SSH sessions?

Author: sorry for the misleading wording here, i meant the code path technically or autosubmit here.

Submission, status checks and file transfers all reuse the SSH session
that was opened at startup, and keepalive packets are sent on the
existing channel to keep it open.

Reconnection on error
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If a connection is lost mid-run, Autosubmit closes the existing session
before opening a replacement: the SFTP channel, the SSH transport and the
SSH client itself are all closed, and then a fresh session is opened. This
applies both to the main session and to the per-platform log-recovery
process. Sessions are not silently reused after a failure, and they are
not stacked.

At the end of a successful run, Autosubmit explicitly closes every
session it opened, and waits for each log-recovery process to finish
before exiting.

.. warning::
    The close operations are best-effort. If the underlying transport is
    already broken, the close will fail silently and the next connection
    will be opened anyway. This prevents a stuck close from blocking
    recovery, but it means operators who want to confirm that no SSH
    sessions have leaked should spot-check the login node directly (for
    example with ``who`` or ``ss``) rather than rely on Autosubmit's

>     logs alone.

Reviewer: >  This prevents a stuck close from blocking
>  recovery, but it means operators who want to confirm that no SSH
>  sessions have leaked should spot-check the login node directly (for
>  example with ``who`` or ``ss``) rather than rely on Autosubmit's
>  logs alone.

Not necessarily operators (workflow engineers, workflow developers, etc.) -- we have the operator role in DestinE, which may be confusing here. Maybe "users" would be fine here, I think.

The reconnection behaviour described above applies after the workflow has
started running. If the very first connection attempt at the start of
``autosubmit run`` fails — for example because the HPC login node is

> briefly unreachable — Autosubmit makes two internal retries within a

Reviewer: I can't recall now if it's configurable or if it's hard-coded (we were trying to fix that). Users reading this may have this questions of whether it's always 2 or not. Maybe we should check that and... I don't know if we should document it here or not 😥 Maybe we should link the documentation about retries here.

Author: <img width="1294" height="728" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1904126a-bf50-42d5-bdf5-1c4d9924ae99" />
it is hardcoded to be 2 under the paramiko platforms class. yeah i can reduce the info here and give a hyper link to the section on retries on the userguide section.

Reviewer: Ah, I remember that constant now. Thanks @rajeshsuraj !

single connection attempt, but does not currently retry the whole
``autosubmit run`` startup. If both internal retries fail, the run
aborts. Adding a workflow-level startup retry is tracked separately.

Filesystem operations during a run
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Beyond handling write-permission probes and SSH sessions, Autosubmit performs several file operations against the remote ``<SCRATCH_DIR>`` during each run. The exact number of these operations can vary based on the workflow's complexity, including factors such as the number of jobs, retries, wrapper usage, and recovery events. The table below outlines the types of operations performed at different stages, with descriptions provided in qualitative terms to reflect this variability.

Reviewer: This text looks great, @rajeshsuraj ! 👏

   * - Listing of ``_COMPLETED`` marker files
     - Once per platform per status-check cycle, to detect newly completed jobs.
   * - Download of ``.out`` / ``.err`` log files
     - Two downloads per completed job (one for standard output, one for standard error). These run in the per-platform log-recovery process, in parallel with the main loop.
   * - Download of job ``STAT`` files
     - One download per job at the end of execution. Additional opportunistic downloads happen when the history database contains incomplete rows.
   * - Reads of remote ``STAT`` files
     - One batched read per status-check cycle, covering all relevant ``STAT`` files in a single round-trip.
   * - Cleanup of previous-run marker files
     - Once per platform at the start of ``autosubmit run``, scoped to the experiment's log directory.
   * - Compression of remote logs
     - One compression command per log file, only when ``COMPRESS_REMOTE_LOGS`` is enabled on the platform.
   * - Write-permission probe

>      - See above.

Reviewer: I haven't checked these items above, but I think these happen on different commands? I mean, the stat files I think recovery tries to recover them... there was something at the end of the main loop that tried to copy something too, I think? I can read these with more calm later and confirm (my brain is slowly entering weekend-mode).

Author: I have added more context , hopefully this helps.

A few patterns worth knowing when reasoning about filesystem load:

- **Submission and log retrieval run in parallel.** The main loop submits
  jobs and queries their status; a separate per-platform process downloads
  the logs of completed jobs. Activity from both runs concurrently against
  the same remote directory.
- **Status queries are batched.** A single scheduler query per platform per
  cycle covers all jobs in flight, regardless of how many there are. Reads
  of remote ``STAT`` files are similarly batched into a single round-trip.

> - **``STAT`` files are written by the jobs, not by Autosubmit.** The remote

Reviewer 3: This is true, in addition we also have the final status in the STAT ( failed/completed)

Also, the submission time is written by autosubmit, but in the TOTAL_STAT file and in the db

  job script appends a Unix epoch timestamp at start and finish; Autosubmit
  only reads these files.
- **Wrappers reduce per-job I/O.** A wrapped package submits one script for
  many jobs and produces consolidated log and ``STAT`` output, which cuts
  the per-job upload and download counts roughly in proportion to the

>   number of jobs in the wrapper.

Reviewer: Does it? I haven't read it, so this is something new to me 😬 @pablogoitia or @manuel-g-castro or @dbeltrankyl might be able to confirm if this paragraph is correct.

Reviewer 3: **During submit:**  Autosubmit compresses all jobs inside a wrapper locally and then, through send_command, it sends + uncompress ( in a single call) them 
 

The wrapper cmd contains only logic to orchestrate the templates; the templates behave exactly as if they were submitted individually. 

In 4.1.17, each job/template writes its own STAT, completed file as before, so the I/O is more or less the same. I believe that we only gain at the moment of submission, but it is pretty negligible 

Also, the wrapper has its own cmd, stat, logs ( which are not downloaded, there is an issue for that), and completed files

Reviewer: Thanks Dani! I think it's probably better to remove the wrappers here, @rajeshsuraj . That way, readers (like a sysadmin, workflow developer, or new workflow user) doesn't have to search what are wrappers and how they work, if they have wrappers in the workflow, etc.

.. note::
    The table above describes which operations Autosubmit performs and
    when, but not absolute numbers (bytes transferred, IOPS, syscall
    counts) for a given workflow. Producing those numbers requires either
    instrumenting Autosubmit with an I/O tracer or running a representative

>     workflow under ``strace`` / ``iostat`` against a controlled HPC.

Reviewer: 🙆‍♂️ Thanks!

    Make sure to create the folder with your USERNAME inside the proper path you pointed to
    (e.g.: <Project_Dir>/<Project_Name_Folder>/<USER>)

.. _platform_connections:

Platform Connections
--------------------

This section describes how Autosubmit interacts with the platforms it has been
configured to use: when it opens connections, when it checks that it has
write access to the remote filesystem, and what it does when a connection has

> to be re-established mid-run.

Reviewer 2: removing wording repetition making it easier to follow and keep track of information

```suggestion
This section describes how Autosubmit interacts with the platforms it is
configured to use: when a connections is opened, Autosubmit checks if it has the
write access to the remote filesystem, and what to be done when a connection has
to be re-established mid-run.
```

The write-permission check
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Before relying on a remote platform, Autosubmit verifies that it can create
and delete entries under the configured ``SCRATCH_DIR``. It does this by
creating a small probe directory under
``<scratch_dir>/<project>/<user>/`` and immediately removing it. The probe is

> a directory, not a file; the name it uses depends on the platform type:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before relying on a remote platform, Autosubmit verifies that entries can be created
and deleted under the configured ``SCRATCH_DIR``. It is done by creating a small probe directory under
``<scratch_dir>/<project>/<user>/`` and immediately removing it. The probe is
a directory, not a file; the name it uses depends on the platform type:
```

     - How it is created
   * - ``slurm`` / ``pjm`` / ``pbs``
     - ``permission_checker_azxbyc``
     - Over the existing SSH/SFTP session.
   * - ``ps``
     - ``ps_permission_checker_azxbyc``
     - Shell commands over the existing SSH session.
   * - ``ecaccess``
     - ``_permission_checker_azxbyc``
     - Local ``ecaccess-file-*`` commands against the ECMWF gateway. Several parent directories are created first because ``ecaccess-file-mkdir`` has no recursive option.
   * - ``local``
     - (none)
     - The local platform does not perform a write-permission check.

.. note::
    Operators searching log files or the remote scratch filesystem need to
    look for all three directory names, because each platform type uses a
    different one. A search restricted to ``permission_checker_azxbyc`` will
    miss probes from ``ps`` and ``ecaccess`` platforms.

When the write-permission check runs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The check is triggered by a small number of user-facing commands, and the
frequency depends on the command:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 28 72

   * - Command
     - When the probe runs
   * - ``autosubmit run``

>      - Once per configured platform at the start of the run, before the main loop begins. If the run later encounters a connection error and recovers, the probe runs again once per reconnection attempt against each platform, until reconnection succeeds. The number of reconnection attempts is bounded by ``CONFIG.RECOVERY_RETRIALS`` (default ``3650``), so a prolonged outage can produce many probe entries in the logs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     - Once per configured platform at the start of the run, before the main loop begins. If the run later encounters a connection error and it is recovered, the probe runs again for each new attempt on each of the platforms. The number of retries is bounded by ``CONFIG.RECOVERY_RETRIALS`` (default ``3650``), so a prolonged outage can produce many probe entries in the logs.
```

Other than simplifying the test I'm a bit skeptical on this line

`so a prolonged outage can produce many probe entries in the logs.`, are you sure it'll keep creating and deleting folders until the end of retries is reached? Or once it manages to create and delete the folder it'll continue without trying all the possible retires it has left.

If so we might need to change this behavior I believe, it could be better discussed later

ran but the row for that execution is incomplete (for example because
Autosubmit was interrupted before the start and end timestamps were
recorded), Autosubmit will try to fetch the missing values from the remote
``STAT`` file for that job. This recovery runs during ``autosubmit run``,
``autosubmit create``, ``autosubmit setstatus`` and ``autosubmit recovery``.

The path opens SSH sessions to the affected platforms when needed, but it
does not run the write-permission probe. ``autosubmit create`` is the case
worth flagging here: it normally appears to be a local operation, but if
there are stale rows in the history database it will open one SSH session
per affected platform.

Connections opened during a run
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When ``autosubmit run`` starts, Autosubmit opens **two SSH sessions per
platform** for every platform of type ``slurm``, ``pjm``, ``pbs`` or
``ps``:

1. A **main session** used by the running workflow for submission, status
   queries and file transfers.
2. A **log-recovery session** owned by a per-platform background process,
   used to download job log files in parallel while the main loop carries
   on with other work.

> The log-recovery session is only created during ``autosubmit run``. Other
> commands (``setstatus``, ``recovery``, ``stop --cancel``, ``create``)
> open at most the main session per platform.
> 

Reviewer 2: maybe we can put just stop, instead the command and argument, it simplifies the explanation.

```suggestion
The log-recovery session is only created during ``autosubmit run``. Other
commands (``setstatus``, ``recovery``, ``stop``, ``create``)
open at most the main session per platform.

```

    Make sure to create the folder with your USERNAME inside the proper path you pointed to
    (e.g.: <Project_Dir>/<Project_Name_Folder>/<USER>)

.. _platform_connections:

Platform Connections
--------------------

This section describes how Autosubmit interacts with the platforms it is

> configured to use: when a connections is opened, Autosubmit checks if it has the

Reviewer: "when a connections" I think the article is not matching the noun (plural).

write access to the remote filesystem, and what to be done when a connection has
to be re-established mid-run.

The write-permission check
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Before relying on a remote platform, Autosubmit verifies that entries can be created

Reviewer: s/entries/files ? It sounds like a DB, but in reality I think we are talking about a file system. (And a directory is a file on Linux... on common Linux distros, pretty much everything is a file https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Everything_is_a_file, so files should be OK...)

   * - ``local``
     - (none)
     - The local platform does not perform a write-permission check.

.. note::
    The probe directory is transient: Autosubmit creates it, confirms that
    the create+delete succeeded, and removes it in the same call. Under
    normal operation there is nothing left on the remote filesystem to
    find afterwards. The directory names above are documented so that
    operators searching Autosubmit's local logs (or investigating a rare
    case where a probe crashed between the create and delete steps and
    left the directory behind) know that each platform type uses a
    different name — a grep restricted to ``permission_checker_azxbyc``
    will miss references from ``ps`` and ``ecaccess`` platforms.

When the write-permission check runs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The check is triggered by a small number of user-facing commands, and the
frequency depends on the command:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 28 72

   * - Command
     - When the probe runs
   * - ``autosubmit run``

>      - Once per configured platform at the start of the run, before the main loop begins. If the run later encounters a connection error, Autosubmit enters a reconnection loop that retries the SSH connection up to ``CONFIG.RECOVERY_RETRIALS`` **times** (a count of attempts, not a time budget; default ``3650``, with a per-attempt sleep that grows from 15s to a cap of 120s, so the default corresponds to roughly 72–122 hours of outage tolerance). The probe only runs on the retry where the connection is actually re-established, not on the failing attempts. In practice this means a prolonged outage produces many SSH retry log entries but at most one probe entry per platform per recovery episode.

Reviewer: "recovery episode" sounds weird. Maybe recovery retry? or simply "per retry". I normally use episode for TV series, or something like a illness/etc.

run`` after startup, during ``autosubmit recovery``, during ``autosubmit
create``, or when an individual SSH command inside the main loop fails
with a network error and its channel is silently re-established (that
reconnect path bypasses the ``restore_platforms`` step and therefore
skips the probe).

.. _stale_job_data_recovery:

Stale job-data recovery
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Autosubmit keeps a history database with one row per job execution. If a job
ran but the row for that execution is incomplete (for example because
Autosubmit was interrupted before the start and end timestamps were
recorded), Autosubmit will try to fetch the missing values from the remote
``STAT`` file for that job. This recovery runs during ``autosubmit run``,
``autosubmit create``, ``autosubmit setstatus`` and ``autosubmit recovery``.

When Autosubmit performs this stale-job-data recovery it opens an SSH
session to each affected platform, but it does not run the
write-permission probe. ``autosubmit create`` is the case worth flagging
here: it normally appears to be a local operation, but if there are stale
rows in the history database it will open one SSH session per affected

> platform.

Reviewer: """
is the case worth flagging
here: it normally appears to be a local operation, but if there are stale
rows in the history database it will open one SSH session per affected
platform.
"""

👏 👍

platform** for every platform of type ``slurm``, ``pjm``, ``pbs`` or
``ps``:

1. A **main session** used by the running workflow for submission, status
   queries and file transfers.
2. A **log-recovery session** owned by a per-platform background process,
   used to download job log files in parallel while the main loop carries
   on with other work.

The log-recovery session is only created during ``autosubmit run``. Other
commands (``setstatus``, ``recovery``, ``stop``, ``create``)
open at most the main session per platform.

For ``ecaccess`` platforms, no SSH session is opened at all. Every
interaction with ECMWF is a local ``ecaccess-*`` command against the
ECMWF gateway, so the connection cost is gateway traffic rather than
login-node SSH sessions.

For the ``local`` platform, no connection of any kind is opened.

During the main loop, Autosubmit does not open new connections.
Submission, status checks and file transfers all reuse the SSH session
that was opened at startup, and keepalive packets are sent on the
existing channel to keep it open.

Reconnection on error
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If a connection is lost mid-run, Autosubmit closes the existing session

> before opening a replacement: the SFTP channel, the SSH transport and the

Reviewer: s/replacement/new one?

     - ``autosubmit run``, ``autosubmit create``, ``autosubmit setstatus``, ``autosubmit recovery``
     - Opportunistic download of missing ``STAT`` files when the history database contains rows without start/end timestamps. Runs before and after the main loop of ``autosubmit run``, at the start of ``autosubmit create`` and ``autosubmit setstatus``, and during ``autosubmit recovery``.
   * - Batched reads of remote ``STAT`` files
     - ``autosubmit run``
     - One batched read per status-check cycle, covering all relevant ``STAT`` files in a single round-trip.
   * - Cleanup of previous-run marker files
     - ``autosubmit run``
     - Once per platform at startup, scoped to the experiment's log directory.
   * - Compression of remote logs
     - ``autosubmit run``
     - One compression command per log file, only when ``COMPRESS_REMOTE_LOGS`` is enabled on the platform. Runs in the log-recovery process, in parallel with the main loop.
   * - Write-permission probe
     - ``autosubmit run``, ``autosubmit setstatus``, ``autosubmit stop --cancel``
     - See :ref:`When the write-permission check runs <platform_connections>` above.

> A few patterns worth knowing when reasoning about filesystem load:

Reviewer: maybe "about Autosubmit filesystem load". Not general filesystem load.

- **Submission and log retrieval run in parallel.** The main loop submits
  jobs and queries their status; a separate per-platform process downloads
  the logs of completed jobs. Activity from both runs concurrently against
  the same remote directory.
- **Status queries are batched.** A single scheduler query per platform per
  cycle covers all jobs in flight, regardless of how many there are. Reads
  of remote ``STAT`` files are similarly batched into a single round-trip.
- **``STAT`` files are written by the jobs, not by Autosubmit.** The remote
  job script appends a Unix epoch timestamp at start and finish; Autosubmit
  only reads these files.

.. note::
    The table above describes which operations Autosubmit performs and
    when, but not absolute numbers (bytes transferred, IOPS, syscall
    counts) for a given workflow. Producing those numbers requires either
    instrumenting Autosubmit with an I/O tracer or running a representative

>     workflow under ``strace`` / ``iostat`` against a controlled HPC.

Reviewer: Hmm, maybe we could create these as a simple test, and link it here, @rajeshsuraj . If you have already used eBPF/strace, or if you are interested. We could use the dummy workflow, run it once and collect metrics, and use that as a simple example, warning users it's a simple workflow, and users may try a similar approach if they need exact numbers. This way we have the required documentation, with general instructions (what you already did here 💪 ), and an extra use case.

    Make sure to create the folder with your USERNAME inside the proper path you pointed to
    (e.g.: <Project_Dir>/<Project_Name_Folder>/<USER>)

.. _platform_connections:

Platform Connections
----------------------

This section documents how Autosubmit opens connections to the configured
platforms, when it verifies that it has write permissions on the remote

> filesystem, and how those connections are torn down when the workflow ends or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
platforms, when it verifies that it has to write permissions on the remote
filesystem, and how it cleans up and closes those connections upon completion or
```

> recovers from an error.  The intended audience is operators running Autosubmit

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
recovers from an error.  The intended audience are operators running Autosubmit
```

> in production who need to reason about the connection

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in production who need to understand about the connection
```

> footprint that Autosubmit places on a login node.

Reviewer: I think we can remove the last sentence about the audience. It will be useful for others as well.

The permission probe directory
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To verify that Autosubmit can write to the configured ``SCRATCH_DIR``, each

> platform exposes a ``check_remote_permissions`` method.  The method creates a

Reviewer: > each platform exposes a ``check_remote_permissions`` method

This might change, and then the docs would be outdated. I think we don 't need to tell users about the method name...

> small probe **directory** (not a file) under

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To verify that Autosubmit can write to the configured ``SCRATCH_DIR``, each
platform exposes a ``check_remote_permissions`` method. The method creates a
small probe **directory** (not a file) under
```

``<scratch_dir>/<project>/<user>/`` and immediately removes it.  The name of
the probe directory and the mechanism used to create it depend on the platform
type:

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``<scratch_dir>/<project>/<user>/`` and immediately removes it. The name of
the probe directory and the mechanism used to create it depend on the platform
type:

```

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 18 35 47

   * - Platform type
     - Probe directory name
     - Mechanism
   * - ``slurm`` / ``pjm`` / ``pbs``
     - ``permission_checker_azxbyc``
     - SFTP ``mkdir`` then ``rmdir`` on the existing Paramiko channel.
   * - ``ps``
     - ``ps_permission_checker_azxbyc``
     - Shell ``rm -rf``, ``mkdir -p``, ``rm -rf`` sequence executed over the existing SSH connection.
   * - ``ecaccess``
     - ``_permission_checker_azxbyc``
     - Local ``ecaccess-file-mkdir`` / ``ecaccess-file-rmdir`` commands against the ECMWF gateway. Five parent ``ecaccess-file-mkdir`` calls precede the probe to compensate for the lack of ``mkdir -p`` in ``ecaccess-file-mkdir``.
   * - ``local``
     - (none)

>      - ``check_remote_permissions`` is a no-op that returns ``True`` without touching the filesystem.

Reviewer: This might change too. Our docs were very outdated, and we automated the configurations to fix that. We should try to keep it future-proof & automated as much as we can to avoid having to deal with an issue like that again, IMHO. So maybe we can leave the Python details out, or fetch it from the code (sphinx has access to the Python code being documented if needed)

.. note::
    Operators searching log files or running ``find`` on the remote scratch
    filesystem must check for **all three** directory names depending on which
    platform types are in use.  A grep that looks only for

>     ``permission_checker_azxbyc`` will miss every ``ps`` and ``ecaccess``

Reviewer: Digressing, but IMHO, we should probably use a UUID or some other random file name instead of a fixed file name to check for permissions. That would probably avoid potential (probably rare, not impossible) filesystem/concurrency issues...

>     platform probe.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Operators searching log files or running ``find`` on the remote scratch
    filesystem must check for **all three** directory names depending on which
    platform types are in use. A grep that looks only for
    ``permission_checker_azxbyc`` will miss every ``ps`` and ``ecaccess``
    platform probe.
```

When the permission probe runs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The probe is only created from inside ``Autosubmit.restore_platforms``, which
is reached from four user-facing commands.  For each call site below, the
``check_remote_permissions`` method is invoked once per platform listed in

> ``platforms_to_test``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The probe is only created from inside ``Autosubmit.restore_platforms``, which
is reached from four user-facing commands. For each call site below, the
``check_remote_permissions`` method is invoked once per platform listed in
``platforms_to_test``.
```

> ``platforms_to_test``.

Reviewer: I think the above is very likely to change in 2->5 years. It might be better to document really when the probe runs. Is it when Autosubmit first configures the experiment? When it runs? In which commands. I believe this is the kind of information users would be able to understand (e.g., a sysadmin from DestinE doesn't know about `restore_platform`, so these docs seem more useful/aimed at AS developers).

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 24 26 50

   * - Command
     - Call site
     - Conditions and per-run frequency
   * - ``autosubmit run``
     - ``Autosubmit.prepare_run`` (only when ``recover=False``)

>      - Once per platform at the start of the run.  ``prepare_run`` is **not** called recursively on retry, so the probe is not duplicated through this path during recovery.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     - Once per platform at the start of the run. ``prepare_run`` is **not** called recursively on retry, so the probe is not duplicated through this path during recovery.
```

   * - ``autosubmit run`` (recovery)
     - ``Autosubmit.run_experiment`` recovery block

>      - Whenever the main loop catches an ``AutosubmitError``, a dedicated reconnection loop calls ``restore_platforms`` once per iteration until reconnection succeeds.  The loop is bounded by ``CONFIG.RECOVERY_RETRIALS`` (default ``3650``).  Under sustained platform outages this is the dominant contributor to the probe count.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     - Whenever the main loop catches an ``AutosubmitError``, a dedicated reconnection loop calls ``restore_platforms`` once per iteration until reconnection succeeds. The loop is set by ``CONFIG.RECOVERY_RETRIALS`` (default ``3650``). Under sustained platform outages this is the dominant contributor to the probe count.
```

   * - ``autosubmit setstatus``
     - ``Autosubmit.set_status``

>      - Once per platform whose jobs include at least one job in status ``QUEUING``, ``SUBMITTED`` or ``RUNNING``.  If ``setstatus`` is invoked when all jobs are ``WAITING`` or ``READY`` (the typical operational case immediately before ``autosubmit create``), ``platforms_to_test`` is empty and no probe runs.

Reviewer 2: have you confirmed the typical operational workflow with the operational?

   * - ``autosubmit stop --cancel``
     - ``Autosubmit.stop`` → ``Autosubmit.prepare_run``

>      - Once per platform.  This applies to any scheduler, not only Slurm; the trigger is the ``--cancel`` flag, not the platform type.

Reviewer: I think this needs to be simplified. Maybe drop the call site. No need to document the function used. It seems like the info was written automatically based on the code -- while what we need is some user-friendly information for sysadmin, managers (like Francesca having to answer about the number of connections/IO ops), BSC workflow devs working with AEMET (e.g. Laura), etc.

The info at this level is probably more useful for AS devs, and I think we can use tools to generate it automatically for us if needed, or use this information and the IDE to locate which parts it's talking about?

The probe is **not** created by:

- The main running loop of ``autosubmit run`` after startup.  Status checks,
  job submission, file transfers and log retrieval all reuse the existing

>   connection without re-running the probe.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The main running loop of ``autosubmit run`` after startup. "Status checks",
  "job submission", "file transfers", and "log retrieval all" reuse the existing
  connection without re-running the probe.
```

Reviewer 2: or

```suggestion
- The main running loop of ``autosubmit run`` after startup. ``Status checks``,
  ``job submission``, ``file transfers``, and ``log retrieval all`` reuse the existing
  connection without re-running the probe.
```

- Mid-loop SSH reconnections triggered by ``ParamikoPlatform.exec_command``
  when a command fails with a network error.  These call ``restore_connection``
  directly, bypassing ``restore_platforms``.
- ``autosubmit recovery``.  This command uses ``online_recovery`` which calls
  ``platform.test_connection`` directly, opening the SSH connection but not
  invoking ``restore_platforms``.
- The stale job-data recovery path (see :ref:`stale_job_data_recovery` below).
- The log transfer that happens at the end of a run.  Log recovery uses a

>   separate, already-connected subprocess and does not run the probe.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The log transfer that happens at the end of a run. Log recovery uses a
  separate, already-connected subprocess and does not run the probe.
```

.. _stale_job_data_recovery:

Stale job-data recovery (separate connection path)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The helper :func:`autosubmit.helpers.utils.recover_stale_job_data` is invoked
during ``autosubmit run`` (before and after the main loop), ``autosubmit
create``, ``autosubmit setstatus`` and ``autosubmit recovery``.  When stale
rows are found in the historical job-data database, it builds a fresh
platform object via ``build_and_connect_platform`` and calls

> ``platform.restore_connection`` to download the missing STAT files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The helper :func:`autosubmit.helpers.utils.recover_stale_job_data` is invoked
during ``autosubmit run`` (before and after the main loop), ``autosubmit
create``, ``autosubmit setstatus`` and ``autosubmit recovery``. When stale
rows are found in the historical job-data database, it builds a fresh
platform object via ``build_and_connect_platform`` and calls
``platform.restore_connection`` to download the missing STAT files.
```

existing platform connections; from ``autosubmit create`` and (depending on
caller context) ``autosubmit recovery`` it opens a new connection per
platform with stale rows.

.. note::
    ``autosubmit create`` does not normally appear to be a command that touches
    remote platforms, but the stale-job-data path can open one SSH session per
    platform with outstanding stale rows in the historical database.

Connection lifecycle during a run
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For platforms backed by Paramiko (``slurm``, ``pjm``, ``pbs``, ``ps``), at
startup of ``autosubmit run`` Autosubmit opens **two SSH sessions per
platform**:

1. The **main session**, owned by the main Autosubmit process.  This is the
   ``paramiko.SSHClient`` together with its ``Transport`` and the
   ``SFTPClient`` (``self._ftpChannel``).  It is created by
   ``restore_platforms`` → ``test_connection`` → ``restore_connection`` →
   ``connect``.
2. A **log-recovery session**, owned by a per-platform background subprocess
   spawned by ``spawn_log_retrieval_process``.  The subprocess calls its own
   ``restore_connection`` against the same platform and is responsible for

>    downloading job log files asynchronously while the main loop continues.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. The **main session**, owned by the main Autosubmit process. This is the
   ``paramiko.SSHClient`` together with its ``Transport`` and the
   ``SFTPClient`` (``self._ftpChannel``).  It is created by
   ``restore_platforms`` → ``test_connection`` → ``restore_connection`` →
   ``connect``.
2. A **log-recovery session**, owned by a per-platform background subprocess
   spawned by ``spawn_log_retrieval_process``. The subprocess calls its own
   ``restore_connection`` against the same platform and is responsible for
   downloading job log files asynchronously while the main loop continues.
```

.. note::
    The log-recovery subprocess is **only** spawned during ``autosubmit run``.
    The spawn is guarded by ``AS_COMMAND == "run"`` in the experiment misc
    configuration.  Commands such as ``setstatus``, ``recovery``, ``stop
    --cancel`` and the stale-job-data path open only the main session per

>     platform — no per-platform subprocess.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The log-recovery subprocess is **only** spawned during ``autosubmit run``.
    The spawn is guarded by ``AS_COMMAND == "run"`` in the experiment misc
    configuration. Commands such as ``setstatus``, ``recovery``, ``stop
    --cancel`` and the stale-job-data path open only the main session per
    platform — no per-platform subprocess.
```

For ``ecaccess`` platforms, neither ``connect`` nor ``restore_connection``

> opens an SSH session.  They run ``ecaccess-gateway-connected`` locally via

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For ``ecaccess`` platforms, neither ``connect`` nor ``restore_connection``
opens an SSH session. They run ``ecaccess-gateway-connected`` locally via
```

``subprocess`` and set ``self.connected`` from the output.  All subsequent
operations are shelled out as local ``ecaccess-*`` commands.  An ``ecaccess``
platform therefore contributes zero SSH sessions to the login node but does

> contribute gateway traffic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``subprocess`` and set ``self.connected`` from the output. All subsequent
operations are shelled out as local ``ecaccess-*`` commands. An ``ecaccess``
platform therefore contributes zero SSH sessions to the login node but does
contribute gateway traffic.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For ``ecaccess`` platforms, neither ``connect`` nor ``restore_connection``
opens an SSH session.  They run ``ecaccess-gateway-connected`` locally via
``subprocess`` and set ``self.connected`` from the output.  All subsequent
operations are treated as local ``ecaccess-*`` commands.  An ``ecaccess``
platform therefore initializes no SSH sessions but it does generates gateway traffic.

```

The ``local`` platform opens no connections of any kind: ``connect`` simply
sets ``self.connected = True``.

During the main loop of ``autosubmit run``, no new connections are opened.
``test_connection`` uses ``transport.send_ignore()`` as a keepalive when the
platform is already connected, and all status checks, submissions and file
transfers reuse the existing ``self._ssh`` and ``self._ftpChannel``.  The only
in-loop reconnection happens inside ``ParamikoPlatform.exec_command`` when an
SSH command fails with a network exception; that path calls
``self.restore_connection(None)`` which closes the existing session before
opening a new one (see below).

Are connections closed between retries?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Yes.  Whenever Autosubmit needs to re-establish a connection, the previous
session is explicitly torn down before the new one is opened.  The teardown

> chain in ``ParamikoPlatform`` is:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Yes. Whenever Autosubmit needs to re-establish a connection, the previous
session is explicitly interrupted before the new one is opened. The tear-down
chain in ``ParamikoPlatform`` is:
```

``test_connection`` (when ``self.connected`` is ``False``) →
``self.reset()`` → ``self.close_connection()`` (closes SFTP, the SSH agent,
both ``Transport`` objects, and the ``SSHClient``) →
``self.restore_connection(as_conf)`` →
``with suppress(Exception): self.reset()`` (defensive second close) →
``self.connect(...)`` (opens a new ``SSHClient``).

> The log-recovery subprocess follows the same discipline on its side.  When the

Reviewer 2: The phrasing is confusing, what did you mean by this?
```suggestion
The log-recovery subprocess follows the same discipline on its side. When the
```

main process calls ``Autosubmit.refresh_log_recovery_process`` (once per main
loop iteration), the helper invokes ``p.clean_log_recovery_process()`` for
each platform if its subprocess has died.  ``clean_log_recovery_process``
signals the cleanup event, joins/terminates/kills the subprocess as needed,
and closes the recovery queue before ``spawn_log_retrieval_process`` is
called again.  The subprocess itself has ``self.close_connection`` registered
with ``atexit`` when it is set up, so its SSH session is closed when the
subprocess exits.

At the end of a successful run, ``autosubmit.py`` issues an explicit
``p.close_connection()`` for every platform in ``platforms_to_test``, plus
``p.clean_log_recovery_process()`` to wind down the per-platform subprocesses.

.. warning::
    All ``close_connection`` calls are wrapped in ``with suppress(Exception):``

>     blocks.  If the close itself fails silently (for example because the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    All ``close_connection`` calls are wrapped in ``with suppress(Exception):``
    blocks. If the close itself fails silently (for example because the
```

    transport is already half-dead), the next connection is opened anyway.
    This is by design — it prevents a stuck close from blocking recovery —
    but it means operators should not rely on Autosubmit logs alone to detect
    leaked sessions on the gateway.  Spot-checking with ``who`` or ``ss`` on
    the login node is recommended for long-running operational experiments.

The reconnection logic described in this subsection applies to connection
losses that occur **after** the workflow has started running.  If the very
first connection attempt to a platform fails at the start of ``autosubmit
run`` — for example because the HPC login node is briefly unreachable —
the ``restore_connection`` method inside ``ParamikoPlatform`` retries
twice internally, but ``Autosubmit.run_experiment`` does not currently
wrap the initial ``prepare_run`` call in a retry loop, so the run aborts
if both internal retries fail.  Adding a startup-time retry loop is
tracked separately.

Filesystem I/O footprint
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Beyond the permission probe and the SSH connections themselves, Autosubmit
performs a number of file operations against the remote scratch filesystem

> during a run.  Operators concerned with filesystem load can use the table below to map each operation

Reviewer 2: I believe that the `scratch` might not be the best description in here since, it is just the directory in which the platforms will store the experiment, and it can change from platform to platform, scratch is mostly for `Marenostrum`, but other projects and `HPCs` have their own filesystem structure.

I believe it is worthy clarifying it at the beginning and using, something more generic like the variable name <SCRATCH_DIR>

and the note could be something like
` For the purpose of facilitating the explanation the Path to the scratch directory for the machine, which holds the experiments in a project will be refereed as <SCRATCH_DIR>`
